Mere months after the COVID-19 pandemic forced most tech teams to work remotely or not at all, the murder of George Floyd ignited a racial reconciliation movement. This movement hit the tech sector especially hard: When Pinterest released a statement supporting the Black Lives Matter movement, two Black women who formerly worked there quickly called out their hypocrisy.
At first glance, open source seems immune to tech’s multi-pronged problems with diversity and inclusion. Open source ecosystems operate online, with contributors working across countries, languages, and timezones to power projects that drive the Web forward. People contribute out of pure love for their projects, not for free beer and stock. With such altruistic intent, the thinking goes that open source is a true meritocracy, a space where all can thrive regardless of their pronouns. 
But if there’s one thing that techies love more than meritocracy, it’s data. And when data shows who contributes to the OS ecosystem, it paints a damning picture.
This chapter offers an overview of open source communities' efforts to make projects more diverse and inclusive. It also offers advice open source community managers and project maintainers can enact to ensure their communities and projects benefit from a diverse contributor base.
The state of open source diversity
A 2017 GitHub survey of 5,500 open source users and developers found that 95% of randomly selected respondents identified as male. 3% identified as women, and 1% as non-binary. 
Now, consider that in 2019, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics found that 28.7% of total employed Computer and Information Systems managers were women. Of the total employed, 9.6% were Black or African American, 15.8% were Asian, and and 4.7% were Hispanic or Latino. 
It’s been well known for years that the tech sector is overwhelmingly White and male: Open source is even more so. Far from being a meritocracy, open source projects are much less likely to see contributions from computer science employees of minority status. 
How does this continue to happen? Recent years have seen an influx of diversity and inclusive (D&I) initiatives aimed at recruiting more diverse project contributors. The Linux Foundation has devoted an entire section of programming for its annual Open Source Summits purely to sessions on D&I. DrupalCon offers scholarships for attendees and speakers of minority status. Several mainstage keynotes at All Things Open 2019 discussed diversity. 
With so much attention from community leaders, why does contributor data still paint such a damning picture? Relative lack of open source activity from women and under-represented minorities (URMs) seems surprising at first, but a look at systemic barriers reveals some persistent problems:
Lack of time to contribute for free
Women and URMs continue to earn less than White men for performing the same professional roles. They are also increasingly likely to be their homes’ primary earners, and they’re more likely to do unpaid labor in the form of housework, childcare, and other domestic tasks.
As a result, they have less spare time to do even more unpaid work by contributing to open source. When they do make those contributions, it’s often because they already work for organizations that let them do so during work hours. 
Nisha Kumar (She/They) is the technical lead for container build, packaging, and distribution at the Open Source Technology Center at VMware. She also serves as co-maintainer for the Tern project, and a contributor to the SPDX and OCI communities. She juggles these projects with raising her 2-year-old child as his primary caregiver. 
To Kumar, these dual roles are nothing new: As a girl growing up in India, she balanced schoolwork with chores, running errands, and caring for family members. These endless tasks left no time for her to pursue passion projects. If not for her ability to work on open source during the day at VMWare, she’s unsure if she could contribute today:
“As a woman in tech contributing to open source in my day job and getting compensated for it, I find that I still don’t have the time to contribute to open source projects I am personally interested in or even volunteer for my local open source communities because I need to also take care of my child and household.”
A more hostile online environment
The Internet is not an equally hospitable place. Women, people of color, and LBGTQ+ people are disproportionately targeted for online harassment, with women twice as likely to experience online sexual harassment as men. And this data was collected pre-2020. 
This year’s confluence of a global pandemic and mass civil unrest has led to increased attacks against people of color, specifically Asian Americans and Black Americans. If attackers feel emboldened to hurt people in the flesh, it’s no surprise that this occurs online as well. If you work on OS projects with Black and Asian contributors, make no mistake: They are in pain. 
“I don’t see any acknowledgement that the Internet, in general, is mostly inhabited by white men who are hostile to women and URMs,” Kumar says. “How would anyone expect folks who are in general harassed on the internet to suddenly trust an open source community to not behave the same way towards them, despite what its Code of Conduct document says?”
Kumar’s concerns are well-founded: Open source doesn’t have a reputation for making most feel welcome. For years, project maintainers have written calls for help, saying they “feel drained, unappreciated, and even abused” on their worst days. A 2017 survey of 6,000 GitHub contributors found that 21% left projects they were working on after experiencing negative behavior. With the odds of such behavior that much higher for minorities, it’s surprising they contribute to open source at all.
“Any time that I spend contributing to OS is time I could also be spending volunteering to advance LGBTQ equality, fighting against police brutality, and other issues that I care about, and that disproportionally affect underrepresented people - in fact, it’s what makes us underrepresented in the first place,” explains Perry Eising (He/They), who works as a community manager at a for-profit tech company that hosts open source projects. “It's challenging to justify to myself to spend time being involved in (sometimes hostile feeling) OS and tech debates when I have so many causes that require my attention and efforts.”
Lackluster documentation
The barriers above manifest in perhaps the biggest of all: OS projects’ lack of documentation. Quantitative data and qualitative interviews repeatedly share that most OS projects don’t prioritize or reward documentation. As a result, outsiders often have no clue how to help.
I speak from personal experience here. After speaking at the Open Source Summit in Vancouver two years ago, I found the community so warm and welcoming that I resolved to find a project I could help with. Given my background as a writer of all stripes, I thought that writing documentation would be the perfect place to start and make a meaningful impact. So, you can imagine how my face fell when I created my first GitHub account, logged onto the platform, and was left totally lost by where to go next. With no knowledge of how to fork, merge branches, or make pull requests, I had no clue where to start - and knew the margin for error was high.
I’m fortunate to live in a city with an active tech community that hosts regular meetups for techies of all interests, including tutorials aimed at beginners. I made my first pull request in person at a conference, and then made most of my first several dozen GitHub contributions at in-person events. It took attending several events over several months for free that I could access for me to start contributing independently. Absent any of these privileges, I would not have spent hours alone trying to learn how GitHub works to make a PR that might or might not get accepted.
The same GitHub survey which found that 1 in 5 open source contributors leave due to bad behavior also found that incomplete/confusing documentation was the biggest challenge. 93% of that survey’s respondents said they had encountered the problem, yet 60% said they rarely or never contributed to documentation. As a result, it’s hard for project veterans to read their projects’ docs: Imagine how it makes outsiders feel.
[PARA - Nuritzi and/or Zach]
Tips for building more inclusive projects and communities
Despite these barriers to entry, there’s good news for maintainers: You hold enormous power to improve your project. Community members, especially those of minority status, have discussed the lack of diversity and inclusion for years. Now, it’s time for project maintainers to act by weaving inclusion throughout their project strategies - not making it an afterthought years later.
“[Diversity and inclusion] keynotes might have lofty ideals designed to raise awareness and some might even argue that they were useful at one point (maybe), but we've moved beyond that,” argues Lisa-Marie Namphy [She/Her], who runs Cloud Native Containers, the world’s largest Cloud Native Computing Foundation (CNCF) user group. 
"Our communities are saying that it’s time to act! And action means a change of policies, fund initiatives, quotas, so many things. The communities are asking for accountability, from the foundations who run them to the corporations who fund them."
If creating an inclusive community sounds overwhelming, remember that the community wants to help. If you’re a project maintainer yourself, you don’t have to do this work alone. In fact, taking the steps below with a trusted team will help improve your project for all.
1. Stop saying you’re a meritocracy
The first step to a more inclusive open source project involves bursting the meritocracy bubble: The more you believe in meritocracy, the more biased your project is likely to be. 
Why? Purely meritocratic projects don’t acknowledge that people enter on unequal playing fields. If an open source maintainer isn’t aware that women often  have less time to contribute, or that LGBTQ+ contributors are more likely to endure online abuse, they won’t take steps to make the community more inclusive. As a result, they risk losing the diverse contributors they worked hard to recruit.
Terri Oda (She/Her) volunteers for the Python Software Foundation and Google’s Summer of Code alongside her role as an open source security researcher at Intel, says claims of meritocracy make her cringe. She says they cause maintainers to ignore opportunities to get more people involved in projects, even in cases where the open source community gathers in person.
“For example, say you're running code sprints at a conference and want to increase the number of women,” Oda says. “If you're thinking about merit and skills, you're going to wind up offering more intro-to-sprinting type content or whining about the university pipeline. But if you look at the bigger picture, you might realize that the conference offers childcare during the main conference, but it stops when sprints start. Or that the venue isn't in a safe area and the sprints run until after dark.”
The first step to build a more inclusive environment is self-awareness. Open source contributors enter projects with a range of lived experiences that affect how -- and if -- they show up. Sitting with and reflecting on this fact is the first, most crucial step. 
2. Prioritize documentation
Assign proteges to PRs that match their interests/expertise. This saves them hours of searching for open PRs on new, unfamiliar projects.
3. Create clear guidelines
“Make sure your project is inclusive from the start. Make it easy for people to get involved and to contribute back.  The mark of a good project is not how complex it is but how easy it is to get involved. The side benefit is that you attract users and contributors of all kind and the project grows in use and usefulness.” - Nithya Ruff
4. Reward OS contributions beyond code
Give your community open and private options to leave feedback on their experiences. This can range from quarterly surveys to giving contributors the freedom to create channels in the project's Slack, Discourse, etc. chat about mental health, being a person of color, how to handle negotiations, etc.
5. Identify new talent to grow and lead the project
“Another reason for acknowledging and including all forms of contribution is to prevent maintainer burnout.  It is unfair to expect the maintainer or the developer who started the project or leads the project to care for all of these issues.  Or to have the skills to do it.” - Nithya Ruff
“My open source contributions definitely changed even before I became a parent: as the coordinator for a global mentoring program that happens in the summer, I had to plan some years ahead to build a volunteer team that could do everything I do.  handed off some of my other projects more completely and never went back to them.  Since new moms typically get less than 1hr of free time per day, the key for me has been aligning the open source I want to do with the open source that work wanted to pay me for. I worked to take CVE Binary Tool open source after I returned from maternity leave, and worked with my boss to make sure I could have time to mentor students as part of my maintainer role.”
6. Engage your community directly
“I am hearing-impaired, and I requested that the All Things Open Conference consider that when in larger venues where keynotes were speaking and there were no specific adaptations for those of us who were not able to hear. I was particularly impressed when attending the Creative Commons Global Summit in Toronto 2018 where nearly all presentations were accompanied by folks who signed and also provide simultaneous closed captioning of all speakers. (That was very helpful.)” - Don Watkins
Conclusion
Seek out sources for new, diverse OS contributors, like CHAOSS/the Linux Foundation and Project Include.
Take the steps above before trying to recruit diverse OS project contributors, because inclusive change starts from within.
